# DTModelStorage 8.0 Migration Guide

DTModelStorage 8.0 is the latest major release of UITableView/UICollectionView helper library for iOS and tvOS written in Swift. Following [Semantic Versioning conventions](https://semver.org), 8.0 introduces API-breaking changes.

This guide is provided in order to ease the transition of existing applications using 7.x versions to the latest APIs, as well as explain the design and structure of new and updated functionality.

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Benefits of Upgrading](#benefits-of-upgrading)
- [Breaking API Changes](#breaking-api-changes)
    - [Supplementary provider rewrite](#supplementary-provider-rewrite)
    - [Restructured protocols](#restructured-protocols)
    - [Other breaking changes](#other-breaking-changes)
- [New Features](#new-features)
    - [Diffable datasources](#diffable-datasources)
  - [Perfomance improvements](#perfomance-improvements)
  - [Other changes](#other-changes)

## Requirements

- iOS 8.0 and higher / tvOS 9.0 and higher
- Xcode 9.x and higher
- Swift 4.0 and higher

## Benefits of Upgrading

- **Support for diffable datasources in iOS/tvOS 13**
- **Unified header/footer/supplementary model API**
- **Improved perfomance**

## Breaking API Changes

Most of breaking API changes in this release are aimed at supporting diffable datasources in iOS / tvOS 13, as well as ensuring storage perfomance by restructuring both internal and external data structures to make them more efficient. Biggest changes though are coming to supplementary models.

### Supplementary provider rewrite

In previous releases, header and footer models were being stored in several places in different storages. 

This created inconsistencies in section API, and complicated work with diffable datasources, which doesn't define datasource directly, but instead delegates section construction to developer.

In 8.0 release, supplementary API has been unified across all storages, and consists of three closures:

* `headerModelProvider: (Int) -> Any?`
* `footerModelProvider: (Int) -> Any?`
* `supplementaryModelProvider: (String, IndexPath) -> Any?`

`supplementaryModelProvider` closure setter has been overridden to allow calling `headerModelProvider` and footerModelProvider. So, for example, if closures are setup in the following way:

```swift
storage.headerModelProvider = { index in [1,2,3][index] }
storage.supplementaryModelProvider = { kind, index in [4,5,6][index.item] }
storage.supplementaryHeaderKind = "Foo"
```

Then supplementary providers will work as shown below:

```swift
storage.supplementaryModel(ofKind: "Foo", forSectionAt: IndexPath(item: 0, section:0)) // 1
storage.supplementaryModel(ofKind: "Bar", forSectionAt: IndexPath(item: 0, section:0)) // 4
```

API to set supplementary model for specific section or specific kind, have been removed. APIs to set all header/footer models continue to work, but are now converting to closure-based API. It's also important to note, that those methods previously called `storageNeedsReloading`, which led to `UITableView.reloadData()` or `UICollectionView.reloadData()`.

So if previously you used following methods:

```swift
storage.setSectionHeaderModels(arrayofHeaderModels)
```

And you need to reload UITableView or UICollectionView, you need to call reloadData explicitly:

```swift
storage.setSectionHeaderModels(arrayofHeaderModels)
tableView.reloadData()
```

### Restructured protocols

Several protocols have been simplified and reimplemented to be more consistent across different storages. `HeaderFooterStorage`, `HeaderFooterSettable` protocols have been removed, parts of their functionality is implemented by `SupplementaryStorage` protocol. `SupplementaryAccessible` protocol has been renamed to `SectionLocatable`.

`BaseStorage` has been split into `BaseSupplementaryStorage` and `BaseUpdateDeliveringStorage` to allow more flexibility for subclasses.

### Other breaking changes

`Storage.sections` property and `Section.items` property have been removed to prevent perfomance hits, that might happen if you called those methods in a context of a database for example, where calling those methods could lead to reading entire table from the database.

As a replacement, `numberOfSections()`, `numberOfItems(inSection:)`, `item(at:)` methods are now used by `Storage` protocol, and `item(at:)` and `numberOfItems` by `Section` protocol.

Several deprecated protocols(`ViewModelMappingCustomizing`) and enums have been removed.

## New Features

### Diffable datasources

`ProxyDiffableDataSourceStorage` is a new `Storage` class, that serves as a bridge between `DTTableView/CollectionViewManager` and `UITableViewDiffableDataSource`/`UICollectionViewDiffableDataSource`. You can read more about support for diffable datasources in [DTTableViewManager README](https://github.com/DenTelezhkin/DTTableViewManager) or [DTCollectionViewManager README](https://github.com/DenTelezhkin/DTCollectionViewManager).

As diffable datasources themselves, `ProxyDiffableDataSourceStorage` is available for iOS / tvOS 13 and higher.

## Perfomance improvements

In previous releases it was possible to directly access sections, and items in those sections by using a single property. And while it was convenient, sometimes it could lead to unwanted perfomance hits, such as reading a lot of data from the database, or having an unnecessary type casts and bridging between different types (https://github.com/DenTelezhkin/DTModelStorage/pull/29).

Old design also required some [internal data structures](https://github.com/DenTelezhkin/DTModelStorage/blob/master/Sources/DTModelStorage/CoreDataStorage.swift#L31-L39) to work around `Section` requirements as well as some [type casts](https://github.com/DenTelezhkin/DTModelStorage/blob/master/Sources/DTModelStorage/CoreDataStorage.swift#L81), that reduce perfomance due to bridging between Objective-C and Swift.

New 8.x API design prevents those behaviors from happening by never providing access to sections or items, while providing the real functionality needed - number of sections, number of items in section, and item at specified indexPath. And all forementioned data structures and type casts have been eliminated from the codebase.

## Other changes

Several other changes include:

* Ability to customize `Bundle` on `ViewModelMapping`, allowing you to use xib files from other bundles.
* `configureForTableViewUsage`, `configureForCollectionViewUsage` methods are moved to protocol extensions rather than being implemented on `BaseStorage` class
* `SingleSectionStorage.items` property is now settable.

For more changes, please read [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/DenTelezhkin/DTModelStorage/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).
